- Hi, it's me Tim Dodd,
the Everyday Astronaut.
Blue Origin, perhaps the sleeping giant
of the aerospace industry
will be going from a tiny
little suborbital rocket
to one of the biggest rockets ever made.
Now you guys have been
asking and asking me
to do a video all about Blue Origin
and their massively
ambitious New Glenn rocket.
But I've withheld, why?
Well, to date we really didn't
have that much information,
just some pretty animations,
a few videos of them
firing their BE-4 engine
and a few basic specs of the vehicle.
Blue Origin has been awfully quiet
about this monster rocket, until now.
Finally, Blue Origin blessed us
or really their future customers
with a Payload User's Guide.
Ah, that sounds like the
lamest announcement ever.
But in all reality it's
super, super exciting
as we finally get those
nitty-gritty details
that I been waitin' for.
So today we actually get to do
a quick rundown on Blue Origin.
We're gonna talk about their
upcoming, New Glenn rocket
and then we're gonna compare it
to some other heavy-lift launchers
that it's going to be competing against.
Finally, I've been waiting
a long for this one.
Let's get started.
- Three, two,
(rocket roaring)
All engines running.
Lift off, we have a lift off.
- Okay since I haven't really done
any videos on Blue Origin yet,
let's do a super quick
rundown on who they are.
Blue Origin was founded in the year 2000
by the richest human alive,
Jeff Bezos, founder of Amazon.
That's right.
They were actually founded
two years before SpaceX.
So wait, they've been around
for almost two decades
and have no shortage of money.
What the heck have they been up to?
That's actually a fair question.
Blue Origin is extremely tight-lipped
and we often don't hear
about what they're working on
until one day they're like, "Oh, hey!
"We did this."
and with their company motto
being gradatim ferociter,
Latin for step by step ferociously,
they're conservative on their time lines,
slow to show off their details
but just as ambitious as the rest of them.
So with that in mind,
Blue Origin started chasing
the suborbital tourism game first.
And they still are to this day.
In 2005 Jeff Bezos discussed plans
for a vertical takeoff and landing
suborbital spaceship called New Shepard.
Their first tests begin
all the way back in 2006
with the launch of their
subscale demonstrator
called Goddard, named after the pioneer
of the liquid-fueled rocket
engine, Robert Goddard.
This little guy was the company's test bed
to learn how to propulsively land,
a key technology they'd be utilizing
in their upcoming New Shepard program.
Think of this like SpaceX's
Grasshopper program
which served a similar purpose for SpaceX.
The only publicly released
flight reached 86 meters
and lasted 25 seconds.
The vehicle flew at least
three times in total
with the last known flight in 2007.
In 2011 Blue Origin
began testing a version
of their booster for the New Shepard,
climbing to over 13 kilometers in altitude
and reaching Mach 1.2 in the process.
In 2012 the company did a pad abort test
of their crew capsule.
By 2015 they began testing their
first full New Shepard system
which is an 18 meter
tall booster and capsule
designed to kiss the edge of space
with up to six passengers on board
for a 20 minute flight.
It's a single stage liquid-fueled booster
powered by their BE-3 engine
running on liquid hydrogen
and liquid oxygen.
Their plan was to separate the booster
and the passenger capsule
after main engine cutoff
and have the capsule
safely land via parachutes,
nice, simple and proven,
while the booster was going
to attempt a rocketry first,
land propulsively after
touching the edge of space.
Their first flight on April
29th, 2015 was a partial success
with the capsule and booster
just about kissing the Karman line
or the boundary of space,
before returning to earth.
Now the important thing is the capsule
was safely recovered via parachutes
however, their first
attempt at landing a booster
was not successful, citing a
failure of hydraulic pressure
in the control system,
leading to a complete loss to the vehicle.
It only took seven months
for Blue Origin to return
to their Texas launch site
with a new New Shepard rocket,
ready to continue testing
their new suborbital workhorse.
Their launch on November 23rd,
2015 was picture perfect.
After successfully reaching
100.5 kilometers in altitude,
the booster and capsule came
rushing back down to earth.
The capsule popped it's parachutes
and was recovered exactly as planned,
however, the booster continued
falling back to earth,
just falling and falling and falling,
gaining velocity with each passing moment,
the ground coming closer
and closer and closer,
'til suddenly, it's engine
ignited exactly as planned
and it performed the world's
first propulsive landing
after reaching the edge of space.
Sorry for the drama,
I just wanted to spice it up a little bit.
So, yeah, they absolutely
nailed their second flight.
And not only that, they actually reused
that exact same booster again,
taking it up to space
and landing it precisely.
And then they did that same thing again
three more times for a total of five times
with the last flight
even doing something even more impressive.
It performed an inflight launch abort,
which is where they literally
lit a solid rocket booster
on top of the main booster
and it still survived.
Now, that is absolutely mind blowing.
They've since retired that second booster
which is now sitting at their factory
and they're now on to
their third New Shepard.
It's flown three times to date
with the last one also being an abort test
but at apogee.
This validated their abort system
throughout every portion of flight,
providing extras confidence
that their passengers are safe
no matter the circumstances.
So the New Shepard is
crazy, crazy impressive,
setting many space flight firsts
and getting really close
to finally launching people
and I know it's just a suborbital rocket
and although the total energy
and velocities involved
in these little hops is nothing
compared to orbital flight,
it's still an absolutely
incredible rocket.
Okay, so now I hear ya.
You're sitting there going,
wait, I thought the video title was,
Will Blue Origin Be the
King of Heavy-lift Rockets?
How is this anywhere
comparable to Falcon Heavy?
Well, seeing as New Shepard
isn't even that much taller
than one of Falcon Heavy's landing legs,
yeah, you're right.
But now, let's check out
Blue Origin's next rocket.
Whoa, wait, wait, wait, they're
going from this to this?
From a Cessna to a 747?
From a canoe to a cruise ship?
From an ant to an elephant?
This can't be right, can it?
Well it is and it's called New Glenn.
Are you seeing a pattern yet?
From Goddard, a guy who tested rockets
to New Shepard, as in Alan Shepard,
the first American to fly in
space on a suborbital flight,
and now, New Glenn, as in John Glenn,
the first American to orbit the earth.
But come on, anyone can draw
pictures of a giant rocket
and say it's going to be super, super big
and have really powerful lasers and stuff.
So, how seriously can
we actually take this?
Ahh, does this answer your question?
(roaring engines)
Whoa, design work began in 2012
to develop a partially
reusable heavy-lift rocket
and in 2015 Blue Origin
made their plans public.
But they dropped another fun hint
claiming this rocket
would be their smallest
of their orbital rockets.
Not only that, it's maiden
voyage is scheduled for 2021
and Blue Origin is
historically fairly accurate
with their dates so this
might actually hold.
New Glenn will initially launch from LC-36
at Cape Canaveral Air
Force Station in Florida.
This pad has hosted over 140 launches,
formerly launching the
Atlas II and Atlas III.
Their factory at Kennedy Space
Center's Exploration Park
is located in very
close to their launchpad
only about 15 kilometers away.
Blue Origin is also working
on securing a launchpad
Vandenberg Air Force Base in California.
I'll be curious if they'll
have to build another factory.
Kinda doubt it.
Or if they're going to ship
it through the Panama Canal
like many other rockets.
New Glenn is gonna be powered by seven
of the companies BE-4 engines.
The BE-4 is racing to become
the first operational
orbital class rocket engine
to run on methane.
The other is SpaceX's Raptor engine.
They're both crazy impressive engines,
but they take on the task
in pretty different ways.
The Raptor engine is a full-flow
closed cycle methane engine
that's approximately the same size
as SpaceX's Merlin engines.
While the BE-4 is a closed cycle engine
that's closer in size
to the RS-25 Space Shuttle main engine,
which means it's very, very big.
The BE-4 is very far
along in it's development.
They've successfully
hot-fired full-scale versions
of the engine many, many times,
including some tests
lasting over 200 seconds.
The performance of the engine
has been so attractive,
it was chosen by ULA to
be the engine they'll use
on their upcoming Vulcan rocket.
The upper stage of the
New Glenn will feature
two vacuum optimized versions
of their BE-3 engine,
that same engine that powers
their New Shepard launcher
only these will be called the BE-3Us.
Combined they produce just
over a meganewton of thrust.
We can kinda speculate similar efficiency
to the RL10 vacuum engine.
Perhaps the United States' most
prolific upper stage engine.
Like the RL10 the BE-3U will
be an expander-cycle engine
but interestingly it will be
an open expander bleed cycle
and not a closed cycle expander.
The only other currently operating
open bleed expander cycle,
at least that I know of,
is being used by Japan on
the LE-5 series engine.
Blue Origin is also planning on using
autogenous pressurization on both stages.
This means they won't use an inert gas
like helium or nitrogen
to maintain pressure in the
fuel and oxidizer tanks,
which can be cool because
it can decrease complexity.
SpaceX is also planning
on using the same system
on their upcoming
Starship and Super Heavy,
previously known as BFR.
The rocket's fuselage
is made out of aluminum,
like most other rockets.
There were rumors of Blue Origin making
a carbon composite upper stage.
But, at least for the initial version,
it's going to be aluminum.
There will be a common
bulkhead on the upper stage,
a technique first seen on the Saturn V.
Okay, all this is pretty impressive
but we haven't got to the
coolest part of New Glenn.
Blue Origin will be recovering
and reusing the first stage.
Blue Origin is actually
quoting up to 25 reuses
out of these massive boosters
and seeing how well they've
done with New Shepard,
I really hope that's
a metric they can hit.
That's super impressive
and will certainly help
bring the cost down.
They'll be doing a similar technique
to what SpaceX's Falcon 9
and Falcon Heavys do most of the time
by propulsively landing downrange
on a large ship in the ocean.
Now before you accuse them
of ripping off SpaceX,
two notes, first off, if
they did, would it matter?
Why wouldn't you replicate
an awesome system
that works so well?
But, second off, just to throw
a little salt at some haters,
Blue Origin actually filed a patent
for reusable rocket booster landing
on a seagoing platform in 2010.
Crazy.
After a bit of a dispute
between SpaceX and Blue Origin
the U.S. Patent Trial and Appeal Board
canceled Blue Origin's patent claim,
meaning the case was lost
and SpaceX was given the go-ahead
to continue pursuing landing on a ship.
But like I said, I don't
really care who did it first
or whose idea it was first,
it's clearly a great idea
and it's what helps allow
a significant payload
to be lofted into orbit
while having enough propellant
margin to propulsively land.
Unlike SpaceX's Autonomous
Spaceport Drone Ship,
Blue Origin's ship is
actually a full-blown
Stena Freighter container ship
called the LPV or
landing platform vehicle.
Another notable difference is the LPV
will actually be moving
while the rocket lands on it.
This helps keep the
landing platform stable,
allowing recovery during rough seas.
And I know, you're probably
sittin' there going,
that sounds impossible,
how could they land on a moving ship,
isn't that super, super hard?
Well, I actually don't think it's gonna be
that much different.
The rocket can kind of know the trajectory
and I'm assuming they've
figured this all out
and they know how to work it
out so I think they'll be fine
but I'm excited to see them do it.
The actual physical landing area
is almost the same size as SpaceX's,
at around 4500 square meters,
although theirs is a
little skinnier and longer
and SpaceX's is closer to a square.
And although the propulsive landing
might actually look
similar to the Falcon 9,
the hardware Blue Origin uses before that
couldn't be more different.
Instead of grid fins at
the top end of the booster,
the New Glenn will use some small fins
similar to the New Shepard.
And although I don't think these fins
are going to retract into the booster,
they are used for the same purpose
which is to steer through the atmosphere.
The New Glenn also has
what could be described as
some small wings or strakes
on the lower portion of the booster.
These increase the surface area,
helping allow the fuselage
to generate more lift
which can give the booster
a little more cross-range capability
and also gives the atmosphere more time
to bleed off more energy.
Just like if you were sky-diving,
your terminal velocity
would be a lot slower
if you were belly first
compared to feet first.
We can also see SpaceX
perform a little bit of this
with their Falcon 9s,
but with some additional surface area,
New Glenn might almost be able to fly
and slow down a substantial amount.
Another fun thing to note is
how far downrange these
boosters will likely land.
One of the fun little details
to come of this New Glenn
PayLoad User's Guide
is how long the first stage
will actually burn for.
The first stage will burn
a whopping 199 seconds
or three minutes and 19 seconds.
Compare that to SpaceX,
whose longest burn times are often
not much over two minutes and 40 seconds.
An additional 30 seconds or
more of vehicle traveling
at well over 2000 meters per second,
yeah, that's gonna put the recoveries
pretty far downrange.
Now again, we don't know
the exact flight profile
or MECO velocity, but judging by the fact
that SpaceX's furthest
drone ship landing is
around 680 kilometers downrange,
New Glenn will probably
land significantly further.
Blue Origin's website does state
that New Glenn will land
nearly a thousand kilometers downrange
but I might venture to guess
it'll go beyond that even.
What do you think?
Place your bets now by voting here!
(lively contest music)
Okay, so now that we're finally
done giving you a rundown
and we're getting pretty heavily
into the comparison mode,
it's time we actually stack up
how the New Glenn will perform
against the other launchers in this class
that are going to be flying
around the same time.
Some notes here before we get started.
If we include all the heavy-lift launchers
from around the world,
our chart and our screen is
gonna get pretty cluttery.
So we're just gonna compare
the five United States
heavy-lift launchers
that will hopefully be near operating
when New Glenn goes online.
All five of these rockets
either are already flying
payloads for the U.S. Air Force
or they've won contracts by the Air Force.
That's another reason
why I put these together.
We're also gonna be leaving out any
super heavy-lift launchers
like the Starship/Super-Heavy,
previously know as BFR and the SLS,
since those rockets are in a
completely different class on their own.
Ooh, I love doing these.
And this one is very interesting.
So first up is SpaceX's Falcon Heavy,
the only other reusable
launcher in this class.
Now, next up is another
three core heavy-lifter,
ULA's mighty Delta IV Heavy.
Then we have ULA's other
launcher the Vulcan.
Now do note, this is not the Vulcan Heavy
which won't be online for awhile longer,
but even with just the standard
Vulcan with six solids,
it's right within the same specs
as all these other rockets.
Then we have Northrup
Grumman Innovation Systems
upcoming Omega rocket, but a quick note,
they too will probably be making
a heavy version of the Omega.
But, who knows when that will come out
and there's really not
that much information out
about this rocket so I had to
fudge a few of these numbers
but I think they're pretty close
but take them all with
a little grain of salt.
And of course we have
Blue Origin's New Glenn,
which if you need a recap on this rocket,
just rewind five minutes.
So let's start with the most
obvious thing, their heights.
That New Glenn is massive,
standing at 95 meters tall,
it's much taller than Falcon
Heavy at 70, Delta IV Heavy 71,
Vulcan at 66 and the
Omega at 60 meters tall.
New Glenn is also the widest
by quite a large amount too,
Now compare that to 3.6 meters, well,
times three in the Falcon Heavy,
five meters, again times
three of the Delta IV Heavy,
5.4 meters of the Vulcan
and five meters of Omega.
Next we need to check
out their fairing sizes.
Now here's where New Glenn
is in a class of it's own.
It's internal volume is massive,
a whopping 458 cubic meters
compared to the Falcon Heavy
which shares the same
relatively small fairing
as the Falcon 9 at 145 cubic meters.
Then there's the Delta IV
which can have up to 233 cubic meters.
Now I can't find the exact
numbers on Vulcan or Omega
but I believe they're
probably going to be around
that same 230 cubic meter-ish region.
This massive fairing allows the New Glenn
to do dual payloads
with up to 10,000 kilograms
in either the upper or
lower payload births.
This is something that ECA's Ariane 5
has done very well with
and now it looks like
New Glenn's taking a note
from it's playbook.
Now let's talk engines.
There couldn't be a wider variety
of engines on these rockets.
The New Glenn, of course,
has those seven BE-4
engines running metholox
on the first stage
and two BE-3Us on the upper
stage running hydrolox.
The Falcon Heavy has 27 Merlin 1Ds
running keralox on the first stage
and a single vacuum optimized Merlin 1D
on the upper stage running keralox also.
The Delta IV Heavy has three RS-68As
running hydrolox in an upper stage
with an RL-10B also running hydrolox.
Then we have the Vulcan
which actually has the same
main engines as the New Glenn,
the BE-4, but again it only has two.
However, you can have up to six
powerful strap-on solid rocket boosters.
It's upper stage has two
RL-10Cs running hydrolox.
Then there's the Omega rocket
which is just solids on solids
and a dash of hydrolox on top.
It's a three-stage rocket
with a Castor 600 main booster
which is similar to the Space Shuttle's
solid rocket boosters
but only has two segments
instead of four.
Then it has a Castor 300 solid stage
and then it's upper stage
is similar to the Vulcan
as it too is RL-10C powered
but down to just one,
which also runs hydrolox.
And it can have up to six
GEM 63XL strap-on solid
rocket boosters as well.
Okay, now let's get on to the fun stuff.
Thrust.
The New Glenn delivers a
more middle-of-the-road
16,800 kilonewtons of thrust,
much, much less than the Falcon Heavy
which has 22,815 kilonewtons
but that's much more
than the Delta IV Heavy
at 9,420 kilonewtons.
The Vulcan almost ironically comes in
at virtually the exact same
amount of thrust as New Glenn
despite having literally
the exact same engines,
well but, two instead of seven.
But what it lacks in BE-4s
it makes up for in SRBs,
winding up with almost the exact same
total thrust at 16,812.
The Omega rocket has a combined
21,798 kilonewtons of thrust
with seven SRB's firing.
That sounds crazy.
I can't wait to hear one of those fly.
Okay, so thrust is great and all,
but what can these things
actually deliver to orbit.
Now before we get too far into this,
I do want to point out,
I'm going to be quoting
the three booster recovery
for Falcon Heavy, one at sea, two at land,
as I think that's how
we're gonna see it fly
most of the time.
And we're also going to be
quoting the first stage recovery
of New Glenn, as I don't
think they ever intend
to expend one.
So keep that in mind when
we're looking at those numbers.
So first, how much can these
rockets get to low earth orbit?
New Glenn can launch a
massive 45 tonnes to LEO,
Falcon Heavy 30, the Delta
IV Heavy can take 28 tonnes,
the Vulcan 27.5 tonnes, and the Omega,
I can't find an exact number on
but it's probably around 30 tonnes.
And lastly, let's compare
how much they can shoot off
to a geostationary transfer orbit.
New Glenn can loft 13.6 tonnes,
Falcon Heavy eight tonnes,
Delta IV Heavy 14
tonnes, Vulcan 13 tonnes,
and Omega 10.1 tonnes.
A few reasons we see
such massive differences
in capabilities between these vehicles
again is due to their recoverability,
the efficiency of their engines
and in some cases their physical size.
And of course, the other
big factor here is price.
And at this point we just don't
have good enough information
on all these launchers
or at least not accurate enough
to wisely factor them in here.
So that being said,
I do think Falcon Heavy
will be the one to beat,
at least as far as price goes.
I'll be very curious if New Glenn
or any of the others
will be able to beat it.
So, all in all, New Glenn is shaping up
to be a super impressive rocket.
By the numbers, it will be the largest
and most capable rocket
flying when it goes online.
Well that is of course
unless SLS makes it online,
which I highly doubt it will do by 2021
or if SpaceX's Super Heavy
starts flying by then,
which we'll see, but the race is on.
I have a feeling the
New Glenn is going to be
impressively cost competitive as well,
seeing how they're planning
to reuse the booster 25 times,
how they can do massive dual payloads
and with streamlined operations,
like having their factory
right next to their launchpad,
this might shake up the industry.
I for one am extremely
excited to see this thing fly.
And as you may or may not know by now,
I'm not really a big fan of tribalism
or just picking a favorite
rocket or a favorite company,
so of course, I'm going to
be cheering on Blue Origin
and their New Glenn rocket
all the way to orbit.
2021 can't come soon enough.
So I'm sure the comment
section is full of Jeff who,
and other whatevers about
Blue Origin and New Glenn.
I don't really care what you guys think.
I'm super, super excited for this
and I'm just a big fan of being positive
and cheering on everyone
in the aerospace industry.
So I encourage our community
here to do the same thing.
So while you're down there
in the comments section,
let me know if you have
any other questions
about Blue Origin, about
rockets, spaceflight,
or even just give me feedback
on if you think these videos
are improving in quality
or what things you think I'm
missing or could improve on.
As always, I owe a super huge thank you
to my Patreon supporters
for helping me do all of this stuff.
There's a lot of work
that goes into scripting
and research, shooting and editing
and I couldn't do it without you guys.
There's even Patreons that are
sitting in my exclusive Discord Channel
or sitting in our exclusive Subreddit
that help me script and research.
If you want to help contribute
or even get access to
exclusive livestreams,
please visit
patreon.com/everydayastronaut.
Thank you.
And while you're online, be sure
and check out my brand new web store
for things like these.
Grid Fin Not-A-Coasters.
Now notice these are not coasters
because they have holes in 'em
and that means the liquid can
drip through to your surface.
But I do promise they're
gonna keep your drink elevated
exactly this high off of
whatever surface they're on,
making them Grid Fin
Not-A-Coaster drink elevators.
And there's also lots of
other fun stuff like shirts,
hats, mugs, prints of rocket launches
and other original photographs,
as well as stickers and patches.
There's tons of new stuff
on my brand new web store.
You need to check it out.
Everydayastronaut.com/shop.
And finally I did it.
I got my music on line for you guys.
You've been asking forever
to get it up on iTunes and
Spotify and yada, yada, yada.
I finally have Maximum
Aerodynamic Pressure,
my first seven song EP,
available, hopefully
everywhere you listen to music.
So search for it, listen to it
while you're doing some science,
maybe you're studying,
maybe you're building a rocket,
maybe you're floating in space,
maybe you're on a road trip,
whatever it might be, check it out.
Let me know what you think
and thank you so much for listening.
That's everydayastronaut.com/music
or wherever you listen to music
hopefully you can find it.
Thanks everybody.
That does it for me.
I'm Tim Dodd, the Everyday Astronaut,
bringing space down to
earth for everyday people.
(new age electronic music)